This is a test.
You lived here after the mine shut down? Oh yeah.
They run into that hole and they grind themselves
in. Put that a little deeper then. Two men drove
their Model T into the mine shaft? Yeah. Do you
remember about what year that was? No, I can't tell
you exactly. What, 1920s?
No. They
had a tipple over there. They had a tipple. How did
that tipple work? Exactly. Well, they're made out
of 12 by 12 straight up. And there's four, six of
them. And then the rest of them. Six 4 by 12s? Huh?
Six 4 by 12s? 12 by 12s. 12 by 12s. Okay. And this was
an engine, you could say. Was it a steam engine?
Huh? A steam engine? A steam engine, yeah. Where
was the boiler? Do you remember that? The boiler?
They had a sawmill that belonged to the man who
owned the coal mine, the coal mine owners. They had
a sawmill. Why would they have a sawmill? Well, to
make some timber for the coal mines. There used to
be a lot of timber. Cut their shore. Did they use a
steam engine again for that? Okay, now what was the
name of this mine site? It's not the Black Diamond
Mine. No. What was the Spanish name? The Black
Diamond is the name they gave the coal mines. Of
vogels. Of vogels, okay. But what did the Spanish
people call this mine? This one? Yeah. This other
one, across here? Right. La recluta, we call in
Spanish recluta, but that's the name of the people
there. La recluta? Recluta. Recluta. Everybody
know la recluta. La recluta. That would be...
Jose Mireles. Oh, Jose Mireles? Yeah. Yeah, over
at the old Vogel mine, that's where he was trapped.
Yeah, that's the one. See, that was the one, two,
that was the third coal mine. No, that was the
fourth coal mine. This was the third coal mine
right here. Okay, what we've been calling the
Black Diamond Mine is La Recluta, and it was the
third coal mine that the Vogels built, right?
Yeah. The coal mines was over there. This is the
third coal mine they built. And then there's
another coal mine back in, I think, 1912. It got
full of water. Okay. It caught some men down there.
1913 is when it was. 1913, that's right. It caught
seven men and a mule. Yeah. We'll be over there in
just a minute. Now, Willinghampton used to live
right there. He used to live right along there.
There was cutting wood from Mr. Nowak. Mr. Nowak?
Mm-hmm. And early in the morning, they run in
there. With that Model T, right? Mm-hmm. How did
they get that Model T out? With the winch? Yeah.
What do you remember about the mines? What sticks
out in your mind most about the mines? What sticks
out in your mind most about the mines?
All I can remember is that I worked hard to it. How
old were you when you first went down?
I was about eight years old. You started at the
brickyard when you were eight? And then you moved
into the mines? No, I was working there in the coal
mine. I want to show you, if we go out there, I'll
show you where the brick kiln was, and that's where
the mines covered up. You know how long the lake
tank was over there? Right, that clay pit, right?
Yeah, that's why I showed you them pictures a while
ago. Right, yeah. Well, they used to get the dirt
out into the big shade, you know? Right. And they
had to get dry. They made the bricks out of dry dirt.
Right. Dry clay, right? Yeah. Well, you were eight
years old when you went down into the mine? Yeah.
Did your parents have to sign a paper? No. They used
to not do that. They used to not do that? Yeah. Well,
what year would that have been if you were eight
years old? A little bit of trouble about that big.
You know what I do? Just beat it over there in the
coal mine. That's the company. But I got a little
bigger than he. They got me picking a shovel, and
said a room or entry run like this, and another one
run like this. And they had a, they run a place like
this for air. See, they run, when you get so far,
then they stop this thing up, and then you get out to
this one. I see.
So when you were eight years old, you just went down
to your father. You didn't really work. Well, how
old were you when you started? About 12 years old.
About how many carloads a day could you by yourself
fill up? Oh, really? Yeah. Well, what year were you
born? Do you remember that? 1890. 1890. 1890, I was
born in La Toscosa County. That's outside of San
Antonio. Coal mines are there. I see. Outside of
San Antonio. So you were down in the mines in 1898.
And when you became 12 years old, you started
digging yourself. How long did you... I didn't
work there. I didn't work, you know, I just went
down to company with my father. I am going to show
you when we got out right back of where them cattle
was at. Right. That was the first coal mine that my
father came to work. Because I don't remember
because I was crawling then. Right, right. I see.
Well, when, did you ever work the mine actually
yourself? Did you go down and dig? Yeah. When did
you start that and where?
I guess I was about 18 years
old. Which mine did you start at? Well, we lived at
Vogel's coal mine most of the time. I worked on the
Texas coal company, but I didn't work no time
there. A few months. Well, when you were working at
the Vogel mine when you were 18, about how many car
loads a day? Well, I could dig about 60. About six?
About six tons of coal. That's six tons of coal a
day. And how much would you get paid for that? I
think I was getting 20 cents. 20 cents a car.
Did they pay you every two weeks or every month?
Every two weeks. Every two weeks? Did you ever get
cash for your pay? Did you go to the commissary and
order food? Yeah, each one of the coal mines had a
commissary. Were you able to save money? No. I had
no sense to save money. What did you spend your
money on if you didn't save it? Well, I didn't save
it because of what little work, you know, what
little work I'd done. Well, I let my mother have,
buy groceries, things like that, clothes, things
like that. Until I married, then I began to work
hard by myself. And once you were, when were you
married? How old were you? I married in 1914. 1914.
And then how many coal cars a day did you? About the
same. About the same? Yeah, about the same. But
most of the time, then after that, after marriage,
I worked for a company, you know, a mule driver. So
you came out of the mines and worked? On top or? No.
Oh, you were a mule driver in the mines. In the
mines, yeah. Did you get paid differently for
being a? Yeah, $2 and something. I think $2 a day. $2
a day. So that would have been about $60 a month?
Huh? About $60 a month? Yeah, but we only worked
five days. Five days, okay. Five days and a half
during the summertime when they was using coal for
this cotton gins. Mm-hmm. Then it's when we get
more work. But in the wintertime, we didn't get
very much work to do. Was there any time during the
year that you didn't work at all in the mines? No, I
didn't work all the time. Steady work that just is
overtime work some seasons of the year when the
cotton gins. When the cotton gins was working,
we'd get more work at the coal mine. We worked five
days. Did you ever work six days a week? No. About
how many hours a day would you work down in the coal
mines? Well, I think about eight hours.
I see. What did you do on the weekends? If you only
worked five days a week, what did you do on the
weekends? Well, I'd play with the kids, play ball.
I worked some in Malakoff, Texas, too. In
Malakoff, okay. That was every kind of work. These
coal mines out here, they're never blasting the
coal out. And it might have cost you this because
that coal's too hard.
Maybe
we can ask Tomas here, what kind of cooking ware did
the women use in the mine camps? Oh, well, you just,
everything you can get. Everything, flour,
tables, bacon. They used tin pots or iron pots? No,
they used, most of it was tin. Tin? Yeah. You found
some ceramics over there, you say? Just
enamelware, like china. That's where the camp
used to be. You see, the camp used to be right along
there. Covered all that ridge back there, did it
not? Huh? Covered this entire ridge, the
crossover ridge. No, we used to live, we used to
have a house right over there. Right just beyond
those two trees, right? But then this place didn't
look like it, no. Not what it was before. You see,
there was no wood in there. All that place in there,
there was no wood. It's all cleared out. Just two
trees, I don't know. How long ago was that? Oh, it
was 19... The last time I worked for this company,
1925. And where did you go after that? I went to
Malakoff. In 1925, I went to Garrison, Texas.
Garrison? Garrison. Garrison. Galveston or
Garrison? No, Garrison. Garrison. But I don't
have a voice for Nacogdoches, but... Right. And
then you came back. When did you come back to
Rockland? Then I came back in 1930. And what did you
do then? Then I went to work at the coal... See,
1930? No, I worked on the railroad. I worked about
two months, maybe three months. And then I went to
picking cotton. And then from there, after cotton
was all picked out, I went to cutting wood. Did you
ever go back to coal mining? No, there was no more
coal mining then. After 1925? No, no, after 19...
34, 35 I think was the most coal mines. Well, in the
1930s, you didn't work in the coal mines. Yeah. You
did. When you came back from Garrison. When I came
back to Garrison, I came back to this same place
here. And I stayed here about five or six months.
And then I went back to Malacca. And I stayed in
Malacca until 31, I think. And then you came back.
And then came back, the coal mines was all gone. I
went to work for a railroad company. In 1931, that
is. Yeah. I see.
Entry, that's main. Then they got places that
comes out this way, they call them rooms. Yeah.
Fingers. Yeah. And then another place comes in
this way, and then here's where you get your air
ventilator. Did you stope it? Huh? Was it stoping?
How'd you mine it? With a stoke? With a pick. With a
pick? Pick and a shovel. You didn't use a drill?
Hammer? No. You didn't have steel drills? No, this
is all the coal around here is lignite. Yeah, it's
real soft. Soft, yeah. But still, it's hard. Most
of the coal that you can dig is about ten cars a day.
How much was in a car? One ton. One ton?
Don't turn a call for 20 cents.